.. _release_v0.3.1:

===============
Version 0.3.1
===============
*(Release Date: June 21, 2025)*

**Focus: Backend Dependency Management & New GUI Application**

This is a significant maintenance and usability release. It completely
overhauls how the library handles its optional heavy dependencies to
eliminate build errors and improve robustness. Furthermore, this
version introduces the first version of the **Subsidence PINN Mini GUI**,
a standalone desktop application designed to make the library's 
PINN workflows accessible to a broader audience.

New Features
~~~~~~~~~~~~
* |New| **Subsidence PINN Mini GUI:** A new desktop application for
  end-to-end forecasting. Located in `fusionlab.tools.app`, this GUI
  allows users to load data, configure all model and training
  parameters, run the workflow, and visualize results without writing
  any code. It can be launched via: 
  
  .. code-block:: bash 
  
       python -m fusionlab.tools.app.mini_forecaster_gui 
  
Improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* |Enhancement| **Centralized Configuration:** Introduced a new internal
  module, **fusionlab/_configs.py**, which now serves as the single
  source of truth for all backend dependency mappings. Hardcoded
  dictionaries have been removed from individual modules.

* |Enhancement| **Config-Driven Dependency Loaders:** The dependency
  loaders in ``fusionlab/compat/``, such as `KerasDependencies`, now
  read directly from the central configuration. This makes them more
  robust and easier to maintain.

* |Enhancement| **Smart Dummy Objects:** Introduced a new internal
  module, **fusionlab/_dummies.py**, which dynamically generates
  placeholder objects for uninstalled dependencies. This dummy system
  is also driven by the central configuration, ensuring it is always
  perfectly in sync with the real dependency loader.

* |Enhancement| **Simplified Module Imports:** The `__init__.py` files for
  the `nn` and `forecast_tuner` subpackages now perform a single check for
  dependencies and create a single, authoritative `KERAS_DEPS` or `KT_DEPS`
  object. This eliminates the need for redundant `if/else` blocks and
  local dummy class definitions in individual model and utility files,
  making the codebase significantly cleaner.

* |Enhancement| **Decorator Refactoring:** The multi-purpose
  ``_scigofast_set_X_compat`` decorator has been refactored into smaller,
  focused components. The new **`adapt_sklearn_input`** decorator now has
  the single responsibility of reshaping a 2D scikit-learn style array
  into the multi-input list required by `fusionlab` models.

* |Enhancement| **New Utility Function:** The "concat" functionality from the
  old decorator has been extracted into a new, public utility function,
  ``concatenate_fusionlab_inputs``, for converting a ``fusionlab``
  multi-input list back into a single 2D array for use in standard
  scikit-learn pipelines.
  
API Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~
* |API Change| The internal logic for handling optional dependencies has
  been completely refactored. While the public-facing API for models
  and functions remains the same, the mechanism for importing them
  is now centralized. This change is internal but represents a major
  architectural shift towards a more robust and scalable design.

* |API Change| The internal decorator for scikit-learn compatibility has
  been renamed and simplified from ``_scigofast_set_X_compat`` to
  ``adapt_sklearn_input``, with a more focused scope.
  
Fixes
~~~~~
* |Fix| **Resolved Circular Import Errors:** The primary motivation for
  this release. The new centralized dependency system, combined with
  the standard practice of using local imports for internal modules,
  definitively resolves the `ImportExceptionGroup` and `ExtensionError`
  failures that were occurring during documentation builds on Read the
  Docs.

Tests
~~~~~
* |Tests| The internal test suite has been updated to validate the
  new dependency loading mechanism, ensuring that both the real and
  dummy objects are created and accessed correctly.

Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* |Docs| Added a new, comprehensive guide for the
  :doc:`/user_guide/pinn_gui_guide`, providing a walkthrough
  of the new desktop application.
  
Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
* `Laurent Kouadio <https://earthai-tech.github.io/>`_ (Lead Developer)
